female narrator:
Ever since people have observed
and thought about the world
around us,
they've realized
there's order in the universe.
One of the big surprises
is that the physical world
can in fact be described
by mathematical relationships.
Why would we want to do this?
Well, for one thing,
it allows us to go an extra step
and actually predict behavior
like the load
a plane can carry safely
or whether a building will
survive hurricane-force winds.
Among physicists,
one of the most famous
mathematical relationships
is the one Edwin Hubble found
between the velocity
other galaxies are moving away
from our own galaxy
and their distance from us.
Hubble's original data,
plotting distance
on the horizontal axis
and velocity
on the vertical axis,
produces a straight line.
Here is more recent data
on a bigger scale.
You can see
that more distant galaxies
are not exactly on the line.
Astrophysicists believe
this is because
of the large uncertainty
in measurements
of these bigger distances,
and they're still satisfied
that Hubble's linear
relationship is reliable.
A big part
of a physicist's work
is the search for these
mathematical relationships,
or formulae.
In this program, we'll look
at how you go about it.
We're going to look
at the behavior
of steel springs,
at what controls
the period of oscillation,
T, the time for one complete
stretch and contraction.
To get answers,
we need to phrase questions
in terms of things
that can be measured.
For instance, we can ask,
what is the relationship
between T
and the mass on the spring?
Now, because T,
the oscillation time,
depends on something else,
we call it
the dependent variable.
The mass on the spring
is different.
We can make it whatever we want,
so that's called
the independent variable.
Before we start,
there's one other point.
T could also be influenced by
a second independent variable,
like the stiffness
of the spring.
So how do we handle this?
The experimental approach
is to hold one of them constant,
say, the spring stiffness,
while you measure the effect
of varying the other,
the mass.
Then you hold the mass constant
while you vary
the spring stiffness.
The students decide to begin
by holding the spring type
constant
while they vary the mass
to see what effect
that has on T.
To do this, they'll use
a range of masses.
They can measure these
to many significant figures,
so the uncertainty in the mass
will be tiny.
They decide that the most
significant source
of uncertainty
will be the human variation
in their stopwatch timings.
To minimize this, they decide
to time five oscillations,
then divide the result by 5.
- One, go.
Two, three, four, five.
Good. 5:36.
- 5:40.
- That's pretty good.
- Yeah.
narrator: They also decide
that several students
should time the same event.
- Two, three, four, five.
narrator:
They believe these strategies
will give them
more accurate times
and a better feel
for the uncertainty,
but they soon realize
there's another issue.
As the spring oscillates,
the amplitude,
the amount of stretch,
gets smaller and smaller.
Is this another variable
they have to worry about?
By timing several sets
of oscillations on the run,
they find that there's
no significant difference
in the period
as the amplitude gets smaller,
so they conclude that T
is not a function of amplitude.
In other words,
amplitude doesn't effect T.
The girls are now ready
to start on a serious run
of data collection.
As they collect the data,
they make a rough graph.
This will help them
look for trends
and spot outliers,
any strange results
that need checking
with repeat measurements.
A rough graph also shows
whether the gap between masses
is too large
and if they've chosen
a large enough spread of masses.
If it's too narrow,
it will be hard to tell
whether the graph line
is a straight line or a curve,
and that's what happens
first time around.
Their spread of masses
was too small,
so they do more measurements
with smaller masses
to increase the spread of data.
Once they're satisfied
with their data,
they plot it more carefully.
They also put in the range
of uncertainty,
half a second, as error bars.
Then comes the moment of truth:
drawing the graph line
to see what shape it is.
It's important not to just join
the dots with straight lines.
That could obscure
the real shape.
A good technique
is to hold the paper up
and look along the data points.
This gives you a better feel
for the shape of the line.
If you can see the points
trending strongly into a curve,
then take your pencil
and draw a smooth curve.
The idea is to touch
as many data points as possible
but also to have about as many
points above as below the line.
Notice that the error bars
work as guides.
They'll help you to draw
your line of best fit
with confidence.
You may be wondering
why we're so interested
in the shape of the graph.
It's because it's the vital clue
to what we're after,
the relationship
between T and mass.
This curve looks like a parabola
on its side.
A parabola is described
by the relationship
Y equals X squared,
so maybe the formula here
is Y equals root X.
Maybe our relationship
is T is proportional to root M.
To test this, the students
prepare a table of root M values
and plot T against root M.
Here's the graph.
It's a straight line,
which means that T is directly
proportional to root M.
We now come
to our second question:
what is the relationship between
T, the period of oscillation,
and the stiffness
of the spring?
But there's a complication.
How exactly do we measure
stiffness?
It's done by subjecting a spring
to different forces,
then plotting force
against extension,
the amount of stretch.
So here they go
with the first step,
measuring the amount of stretch
for a collection of springs,
applying a range of forces
to each spring.
[quirky bass guitar music]
Here are the results,
plotting force against extension
for one spring.
Now the graph lines
for all the springs measured.
What they find is that
the relationship is linear
and therefore
has the mathematical form
of Y equals MX plus C.
The gradient of this line
is called the spring constant.
It's a measure
of the spring's stiffness.
A loose spring
will have a small K value,
a tight spring,
a large K value.
Now that the girls
have worked out
the spring constant value
for their springs,
they're ready to investigate
how the oscillation period, T,
depends on this second
independent variable.
Remember, they need to exclude
any effect
from the other
independent variable, the mass.
- 4:78.
- 4:92.
narrator: So they put
the same mass on each spring
and use the process
of timing five oscillations,
as they did before.
- Ready?
- Three, two, one.
narrator: The aim, of course,
is to produce a graph
of period versus spring constant
for a given mass.
This is the graph
of their results.
It looks like a hyperbola
but what sort of hyperbola?
We can't easily tell
if the form is Y equals 1 over X
or Y equals 1 over X squared
or Y equals 1 over root X,
which can also be written
like this.
So what to do?
Here is a very powerful way
of analyzing graphs
where the mathematical form
is not obvious.
It looks like the relation
is of the form
T equals LK to the power of B,
where B is probably negative
to make it look
like a hyperbola
and L is some constant.
So now you need to use
what you know
about your logarithm rules.
Since T equals LK
to the power of B,
then you can be sure
that log T equals log LK
to the power B.
We can write this
as log T equals log L
plus B log K.
Why this way?
Well, this equation
is of the form
Y equals C plus MX
where M, the gradient,
is B, the exponent
in our analysis.
So what you do is prepare
a graph of log T
versus log K.
The gradient turns out
to be minus 0.5,
so we can say that T is
proportional to 1 over root K.
- Go.
- One, two...
narrator: From experimental
measurements,
the girls have now worked out
the relationship between T
and two independent variables,
M and K.
- Um, so...
narrator:
There's one more challenge.
Can they combine
the two relationships into one?
You're familiar
with such relationships.
One of the most famous
is Newton's second law:
force is proportional
to two independent variables,
mass and acceleration.
[quirky bass guitar music]
If there is
a single relationship
that connects
the spring variables,
it will look like this.
This would relate T to both mass
and the spring constant
where theta is some
as yet unknown constant
of proportionality.
In this case, the girls
should have no difficulty
in finding a specific value
for theta.
With their experimental results,
theta is the only unknown
in the equation.
What they do is substitute
a few different values
of M and K
and the corresponding T
into the equation.
So here is one set of values.
Putting these into the equation,
they get a value for theta.
Taking other values
for M, K, and T,
they use the same formula
and finish up with a set
of calculated values for theta.
Averaging these, they find
that the value of theta
is about 6.3,
plus or minus 0.2.
This compares well
with the theoretical prediction
of the relationship
T equals 2 pi
times root M over K,
since 2 times pi is about 6.28.
Real scientific data
must be verifiable,
which means that someone else
can, if they choose,
repeat your experiment to see
if they get the same results.
No matter how amazing
your conclusion,
it won't stand up
if you have no record
of what you did
to produce your data.
There's no precise agreed format
for a report.
The structure,
names of sections, and so on
can vary.
Your teacher may prefer
something different,
but here's a typical approach.
First, the aim.
It should explain
the relationship
that you're looking for
and refer specifically
to the variables
you're going to measure.
Something like, "How does
the period of oscillation
"of a steel spring vary
with the mass of the spring
and the stiffness
of the spring?"
And you could state
the relationship like this.
After the aim,
list the apparatus you used:
eight springs,
selection of masses,
ruler, stopwatch, scales,
door frame for support.
Next, you need to describe
your method.
For instance, to investigate
the effect of different masses,
describe how you timed T,
what masses you used,
how many oscillations you timed,
and so on.
- Three, two, one.
narrator: It's good to include
diagrams or photos
that help to show what you did.
The next section
will be your results.
In this case, the easiest way
is to use tables.
This is where you decide
on your uncertainty.
Include this
in your results tables
along with a sentence
justifying your choice.
There's no mysteries about this.
It will usually be based
on the range of results
you recorded.
Next is the analysis.
This is where you use
your results
to draw your graphs,
calculate gradients, and so on.
You should also describe here
the final relationship
you arrived at.
After your analysis
is the discussion.
This outlines issues
arising from your experiment,
such as any problems
you encountered,
how you could have reduced
your uncertainty,
and suggestions
for a better approach.
This section is sometimes
called evaluation.
Finally, you need a conclusion.
Don't feel like this has to say
something totally new.
It doesn't.
The important thing
is that it answers the question
posed in the aim.
In this case,
it states the relationship
that you have discovered.
Most of the relationships
you encounter
in your study of physics
were found by a process
like the one we've explored
in this program.
If you continue on
into scientific research,
we hope your life
of experimentation
is exciting and fruitful.
- Ready?
[laughter]
- Sorry.
- Yeah, that's not--
No, that's not
what I've been doing.
Three, two, one. Go.
Is that right?
- Yeah, that's what
I've been doing when it--
just when starts coming down.
- Oh, okay.
Then we'll do that.
I've been doing the other one.
- Which one have you been doing?
- The--it goes up.
When it goes up.
- Would you--I'm just doing it
when it reaches the top,
when it's at the top.
- You're confusing me.